on the backside there.
Oh, I see. And that's the way the thing worked.
And I kept going on.
Taking courses. Taking courses. Now, were these
basically correspondence courses? These were
correspondence courses. That's correct. up
until, here's the order, sending me to Fort Sill
for 90 days
to take what they call a battery officer's course.
And when was that? This is September
16, 1938. Why 1938?
Well, I was interested in qualifying myself. I was
given a second lieutenant's commission when I got
out of A&M. But I finished with certain grade
points in ROTC. And I got interested in
associating with these people as a second
lieutenant. And we went down to Fort Sam, or out to
Camp Bullis, for our two weeks active training.
Sure. Every summer? Every summer. I didn't miss a
summer until I went to Fort Sill in 1940,
permanently.
I was qualifying myself and I could see myself
progressing. I was getting something out of it and
having a lot of fun with it. And so I, at that time I
was a bachelor and just something to tie into and
do. And I did. And
here's where I got my certificate of capacity to a
captain. And
he followed this whole thing right to
Here's another one of our OTC officers down there.
He
finally made General Officer Aldridge Squirrel
Tooth Aldridge. That's where he was telling me
that they had sent my promotion, recommendation,
a motion to a captain to the War Department.
Here's where I was promoted to Captain in the
Reserves, effective July 26, 1939.
Would you consider giving these personal papers
eventually to the archives at Texas A&M? Well,
when I die, I will them to them.
Certainly not now. I haven't thought about it. The
archivist, who is my boss, would be very happy to
have these in the permanent collection. They only
pertain to me and the others that are on the same
orders. But that's exactly what we're after.
That's what archives do, collect personal
papers.
And of course, I was wondering about the
conditions inside the reserve units. Did you men
get paid for being a reservist then? We got paid in
the sense that when we went to active duty, we got
second lieutenant and first lieutenants paid for
fourteen days. And they paid our transportation
down and back. You didn't get paid for any weekend
assignments or any week, every Thursday night?
Every Thursday night, no. All you do is you've got
credit for doing that correspondence work. And
ultimately, you were rewarded, certainly not in
the concept of the thing at that time, but
You built up longevity by time. Every Thursday
night was one point. This is something that came
along later, and we had no conception of it at that
time. And this has all come about, I guess, after
the war of active duty points in calculating
retirement. And I guess the Reserve Officers
Association had
much impact on it of influencing the army that set
the system up to give credit for those inactive
days. Because in calculating my retirement pay, I
got credit for those Thursday nights and those two
weeks that we went to camp. Then it was unknown, but
it was a recognition. This came about after the
Second World War, but before that it was unknown.
That's right, it was unknown. In other words, you
were not doing it. There was no real financial
benefit whatsoever for being in the reserves. No.
Like there is today. No.
Here's my order to call them to active duty. I'm
just looking at this thing. Okay, you were called
to active duty in what, 1940? Yeah, December 29,
1940. And
Appy was, just looking at these now, Appy was
Oklahoma A&M boy, Oklahoma University. Fanning
was, I think, Oklahoma. Fleet was A&M. Jim Kerr was
A&M. Kidd was A&M. And Kendrick was A&M. So four out
of six on that order were Texas A&M.
Artillerymen.
Those were all artillery. All of us went up to Fort
Sill together. What were your feelings when you
were called into the active duty in 1940? Well, I
was working, had a job, and my feelings were that
because of the national
or international situation, Hitler was running a
merc that Our very stability of our country was at
stake, and it was my job to go do what I could. I was
happy for the qualification I had, meaning I had
prepared myself now. I didn't know what I was
preparing for, but I was preparing myself, in that
I could do a better job for them. I was obsessed with
the fact that I was going to defend my country. I
felt that I could do a better job for my training.
And back then, I couldn't put it in those words. I
knew what I was trying to do of keeping current and
qualifying myself if it ever happened. Well, when
I got disordered, it did happen. And I
am unqualified, unequivocally, you can say, that
my training at A&M and my
commission out of A&M gave me some breaks by Army
officers that had been associated with A&M
officers. And you got a break by being an A&M cadet
or A&M officer. What do you mean? Can you give me an
example of a break? What do you mean by a break?
Well. They treated you better? No, you got a chance
to. They gave you a responsibility. Oh, I see.
Okay. And you got a chance to demonstrate your
capabilities. Okay. I went up to Fort Seal in
December 1940 and
got assigned to, because of my rank, I was given a, a
battery and school troops which do all the
maneuvering and firing for the students there.
And I stayed there about four months, five months,
and then they had set up the replacement training
center,
artillery replacement training center. We
trained
We trained initial trainees and replacements.
And the break I'm talking about is that because I
was an A&M civil engineer, I was put in command by an
old army colonel who had been associated with A&M
cadets on this reserve training plane. And
everyone that came in his command, He grabbed him
and he personally assigned him. And he looked at my
66-1, which is your personnel record card, this
pink card here. And he looked at that and saw Texas
A&M, civil engineer. And he said, Kidwell
commands the instrument and survey battery.
As such, we got all of the college graduates,
draftees,
who were engineers.
And I taught them, my battery's job was to teach
them artillery survey. Operating a plane table,
operating a BC scope, operating a transit to
survey in Sure. The artillery.
And so that's the first thing that you did? That was
the first thing after I got moved over there from
this school troop battery. So this is the type of
break that you're talking about? This is the type
of break. In other words, he's given you an
opportunity to prove, to make or break yourself.
He gave me the opportunity to prove Because I
wasn't getting the average draftee. I was getting
all college boys or college graduates. If a
draftee came in and he was studying any kind of
engineering, he came to my battery. Because we
were teaching them something. We taught them to
figure firing data off of a slide rule, for
instance. And a slide rule was brand new at that
time. There were no calculators, but there were
slide rules. And we taught them to figure firing
data with slide rule. Well, to figure firing data,
you got to know logarithms. And he came right on
back to his college training seat. I got the finest
soldiers that came in the Army and were assigned to
the artillery. They came in my battery. And I made
qualified capable soldiers out of them. And they
went out and did their job. And because of that, I
consistently got superior ratings on the type of
soldier we were turning out, notwithstanding the
fact that we had a high caliber person to start
with. And some of them come on the other side of the
tracks, and some of them come out of Brooklyn.
Cross section of life. But I got the top of the
cream. And I was able to mold those people into
where every one of them were proficient when they
left there. And we didn't have any discipline
troubles. I mean, they wanted to do. They came in to
learn something. And we gave it to them. And they
went out and did their job. And that was our job to
teach them. It was a good job. I had lots of fun with
it, and I enjoyed it because I could see my
accomplishments. How many did you teach? Tell me
how it was set up. How long it was set up? Yeah. How
long was the school? How was it set up? Well, they
were there basically 12 weeks. They ran through a
12-week cycle. Okay. And we had them three months.
And, of course, the more proficient ones we'd send
out in 10 weeks if they got a emergency
requisition, they called it, a hurry-up call.
Some outfit going overseas and they needed an
instrument survey man or they needed a fire
direction center man. We'd take the cream, the
most astute student, the most applicable
student, and learn the fastest. We'd give him a
cram course at night and send him out. And this is
something that Never been done in the Army before.
Is this because of the war, then? Well, this was
because of the emergency. It had to be accelerated
because of the war, then? No, it had to be
accelerated. We were given a man 12 weeks. And then
we would have an emergency requisition because of
some of them going to the Far East. I see. And then is
when I took the attitude of having this night
training also. to give him a cram course. And of
course, it couldn't help it but be recognized by my
battalion commander and my artillery commander.
What did they think? Well, they liked the way it was
progressing. And they kept up very close to it. And
that's the break that I got because of this. See, I
did an outstanding job with that battery. And I got
to go to the field officer's course. The colonel,
my regimental commander, got a requisition for
two students to go to the field officer's course,
which means qualifying you for a field officer,
meaning a major or higher grade. And he had seen the
work I'd done over there, and he knew that I'd go do a
good job. He didn't want to send somebody over
there that would bust the thing. It wouldn't be
outstanding. Because his recommendations
reflected on him. Couldn't help it. So he sent me as
one of his
recommended students, and I went over there. And I
stood high in the academic class. Well, that's on
the 66-1. And because of that, The next time, while
I was at the field officer course, I got promoted to
major. I don't remember when that was, but I got it.
And that made you the battalion executive officer
of the 8th Training Regiment? Yeah. When you were
promoted to major? Yeah, I was, I got promoted to
major and
Major, 20th of June, 1942. Okay, okay. I was in the
Army 18 months.
Here it is, 19th of June, 1942. Here's my... 19th of
June? That's what it says here. It says 20th here.
Well, wait a minute. It's dated. It may be dated as
of...
Well, there it is. You weren't even a major a year
before you were promoted to about ten months, and
then you were promoted to lieutenant colonel. How
can you account for that? That's an incredibly
fast promotion. I'll tell you about that. But
here's the 19th of June, and this is my promotion
order. Okay, I'll just cross this off then. Date of
rank is date of this order, unless otherwise
specified, indicated after name. I'll put 19th.
19th, yeah. So that's 19th of June. And it says date
of this date.
But anyway. How can you account for the fact that
you were only a major 10 months? Well, I'll tell
you. There again was a break, two breaks, and
having been recognized, every
job they gave me as a major, I did and excelled in it.
And what job? The job was battalion executive
officer, right? Battalion executive officer,
and I believe I was S3 at part of the time. The S3,
yeah, operations. Operations officer, and I was a
summary court martial and all the added inspector
jobs that you get. So what were your functions then
as the battalion XO? Well, as battalion exec, you
carry out the... battalion commander's orders or
see if they're carried out. You do all the checking
for him. He's the man who makes the decision, but
you get him the information. And you check on your
battery commanders. And you check his messes. You
check his supplies. You check the bookkeeping.
It's an executive job, meaning you do whatever the
battalion commander desires, and you have no
command. You have no command, but you are a
representing commander, if that's a good way to
put it. Okay, fine, fine. And there are your, the
function of course of the battalion, was training
there, artillery training. Your battalion S3 is
your playing and training officer. As such, you
have to get up the battalion training programs and
see that your battery commanders have got their
lesson plans for a certain lesson on a certain day.
And you coordinate all the training and
inspection of that training. And that eminently
qualifies you from a training viewpoint.
before you can inspect it or set it up, you've got to
do it yourself. Absolutely. Now how many men, I
know this is a difficult question, but here we are
in 1942, approximately how many men were we
training? Or in training? Yeah, how many young
officers, most of these are second lieutenants,
right, that you're training to be artillery
officers? How many are in each class, or how did
that work? Well, we were training them basically
as instrument survey people, meaning battery
fire direction centers, your battery surveyors
and battalion surveyors, and your battalion fire
direction people, which are all engineering
jobs. And I commanded that battery for 18 months,
and gosh, we ran through 250 on a 12-week
cycle, three-month cycle. So we... Okay, so every
class, and it was 250, and it was 12 weeks. Yeah, 12
weeks, that's right. Okay, that's basically what
I wanted to know then. That would be 18 divided
by 3. If 12 weeks makes 3 months, it would be 6 times
250, 1,500 people. So you were really keeping them
moving through there. Had to, had to. Sure, you
were, yeah. And I had to stay one jump ahead of them.
Yeah. Believe you me. I was out there before they
ever got up in the morning. I stayed until after we
put them to bed every night, looking after my
people, purely and simply looking after my
people. And I tell you, looking after your people
means to me, means seeing that everything goes
right for them. For instance, one time I went out
there at about 4.30 in the morning to check on the
breakfast. The cooks had come in drunk that night
before, 1.30 to 2 o'clock. going on to bed and
sleeping and having a charge of quarters wake them
up at 4.30 or 5 whenever they were supposed to get
up. They cooked all the breakfast, eggs, made the
biscuits and everything, fried eggs. Then they
went to sleep. And I got there about 4.30, a quarter
to 5, and saw all these cold fried eggs. And I went in
and asked my charge of quarter, what the hell is
happening? He didn't know. He said he knew the
cooks were in there. He thought they were getting
just preparatory work or something. He didn't
know they cooked breakfast. Well, when I saw what
happened, I went in and told his first sergeant
what happened by that time he was up and around. And
I told him to go ahead with Reveille
and tell the men that breakfast would be late. And
they'll go on about their chores. They'll clean up
the barracks, do the police work and everything.
We'd have breakfast at 7.30 so there could be a
train at 8 o'clock. Well, of course, this so
happened that the colonel drove through the area
that morning checking Reveille.
And we were, our schedule instead of being
breakfast and all was also upset because it's
breakfast business. And he stopped and came
wanting to know what the hell was happening with my
schedule. And I told him. And he says, I got it,
Kidwell. I'm glad to see you're here. And I'm glad
to know that you know that an army travels on their
stomachs. Kidwell, he says, very early in life,
and I'll give you the same lesson. If you give a man a
good breakfast, he'll do you a good day's work.
What? This is kind of bricks that I'm talking
about. Sure, really. I impressed that old man. And
so you're talking about being a major and why I was
promoted to lieutenant colonel in a hurry. That
was so fast, yeah.
Why did they shift you to Fort Meade, Maryland?
Well, wait a minute. Which was your second, which
was after you left Fort Sill. Then you went to
Maryland. Chronologically, you're skipping
here. I don't know the notes that you have, but
chronologically. This is what I got from your
Westmoreland letter. Oh, well, yeah, there's a
lot that I've left out. Oh, okay.
I'm looking, I'm just thumbing through orders
here now.
You bet. Let me stop here.
I'm looking for order here. Because of a lot of
instances like this breakfast deal
that I reiterated,
Incidentally, what did you do to those cooks? I
busted all of them and transferred them out on the
next requisition for people. They had a cook's
battery up there also.
Here's what I was looking for. They had a cook's
battery that taught raw recruits, Army cooking.
And there again, it's 12 weeks. And the first time
they got a requisition for some more men, well, I
said, I'm going to mess all those cooks out on that
requisition, because they were qualified cooks.
They just goofed up once. They just got drunk and
goofed up, and they had the wrong battery
commander, as far as I was concerned. And I got rid
of them. I busted them and shipped them out. The
rail break that I got because of that cooking and
lots of other instances like that. But on
January 24, I got ordered to command and general
staff school at Leavenworth. I don't remember
whether that's in that thing or not.
DAVID BURRAGE. 1943. January 1943, yeah. OK, I got
it right up there. And why did they send you? To go to
school. Yeah, but why you instead of somebody
else? Because my regimental commander made the
recommendation and sold it to the general that we
worked for. And there again, he wanted to send
somebody that he knew damn well would go up there
and make a credible record. And I had impressed him
with his breakfast business. As soon as I got
going as a battery commander, you know, a battery
earns money, dividends from post-exchange
profits. And they give it to you. You can spend it on
anything you want to spend it on, as long as for the
benefit of all the men in that battery. Well, our
mess hall up there was just a dismal, two before
mess hall. And I got the idea of decorating it up. So
I lined it with plywood and we painted it, as I
remember, a soft green color. And it made a
pleasant place to eat. And that was certainly a
legitimate expenditure of post-exchange money.
And an old man come by to inspect my mess and he saw
all this work going on. He asked about it, and I told
him what I was doing. He said, that's fine, that's
fine. And he came back, and before it all over, why,
half the mess halls up there were done that way,
because those commanders would come by and see
mine that way. Of course, they got to the general,
and he commented about it, and they admired it.
Well, all the rest of them wanted to do their same
way, and that kind of thing.
Another thing, they had sand and ultimately dirt
walks up there. That's the way the camp was
constructed. I knew something about concrete and
there again we had this money so with my battery
carpenter who did all the farm work and then we just
got some people to help us if we wanted to, we poured
concrete walks in the whole area. Well they did two
things when they were going to the mess in the
inclement weather, they their shines from
getting messed up, kept mud off their feet,
meaning they didn't track mud back into barracks
and have to mop it again and all these kind of
things. But old man saw that too. And I was always
doing something like that to better take care of my
soldiers. Wow. Okay. So he sent you up here? So he
sent me to... And tell me about Command and General
Staff School. Up at Command and General Staff
School in January 1943. I
had a good friend that went up there and came back in
Class 11. I was in General Staff School 12, Class
12. It was an accelerated... wartime course of 90
days.
And my friend was a school teacher, artilleryman.
He had a company or battery next to mine. And we
visited over a cup of coffee, our mutual problems
in our areas, this kind of thing. And he went, he was
there ahead of me. He came back and he said, now,
Graber, I'm going to tell you how to get along up
there. And I said, fine. That's what I'm
interested in. There's two things you've got to
do. You've got to study meticulously and keep your
eyes and ears open during all the lectures, all
lecture discussions. And I had some class
participation, the basics of the lecture. They
give you problems work, get out at nighttime, and
you come back. They call on students to give their
solutions to them in this country.
You keep your eyes and ears open and take
meticulous notes in the classroom. And as soon as
you eat supper, you go back and start studying
until 10 o'clock. And you go to bed and go to sleep.
So the next day, you'll be alert and keep your eyes
and ears open, take my notes. And then he pointed
out one thing. He says that whenever they repeat
something in your notes, you underline it,
because it's coming back on pay quiz. They call
them pay quizzes, on a test. And I meticulously did
what he told me. I don't have it now, but I had all
those books alphabetically listed, or indexed,
so I could turn to the reference data like that. And
you could use any manuals, any Army manuals you
wanted on examination.
Because the theory is, if you didn't know where to
look for it, I mean, if you didn't know it, you
didn't know where to look for it. And I had them all
indexed like that. So if they wanted the train
length of a quartermaster battalion, I could go to
cues, and I had it in two or three seconds. and that
gave me time to do something else and I had to stop
and think about it. So you were extraordinarily
well organized. I was well organized because the
school teacher friend was there ahead of me and he
told me what to do.
And why I got promoted to lieutenant colonel so
fast is I went up there and excelled again. You
can't get away from that, excelling. I stood
number 11 in a class of Over 800. Number, but that's
tremendous. Number 11. And the reason I did it,
they gave you these quizzes all, I don't know, once
a week, once every two weeks, on particular
subject, depending on how long the subject was.
And then they give you a month quiz or six weeks quiz
when they finish that subject, you know. And as I
remember, I made all As but two, and they were Bs.
And the first 10 probably made all As, I don't know.
Or they made a better A than mine. As I remember, the
A grade was 95 to 100, and B was 85 to 95, and C was 70 to
85, and below C was a U, if you didn't make it. 70 or
75, it was unsatisfactory. And I made all A's but
two. Their A's may have been higher than mine, or
they may have made A while I made a B. But anyway. But
you did quite well. I was 11th, which is
outstanding. Well, there again, that gets on the
66-1 scene. Sure. And when the general, this is the
first introduction you get to when you're you're
assigned to his command, is you get this, this goes
ahead of you. And he'll take it, or his, his exec,
chief of staff will take it, and they'll go through
here. That same old kid went to the NG&R course in
38, he went to field officer's course and did so
well in 42, and he did so well up at the CNGS, he's 11.
in his class at CNJS in 43. Well, that earmarked me
and gave me breaks. That's all a word you can say
about it, gave me some breaks. Now, during this
school, this command staff college, during this,
what did they teach you? They teach you tactics and
wartime tactics and strategies. strategic
planning and tactical planning, pretty much
anything. A.T. taught me how to maneuver armies
and divisions and artillery groups as a
commander. Tactics and strategies. So this would
help, of course, this would help you get promotion
too because they'd need somebody on the
battlefield with this knowledge. That's right.
There's no question about that. Okay. That equips
you to do their job. And, you know, a tactical
commander has a tremendous responsibility.
Sure, absolutely. And he doesn't want an average
person doing his command down below him. He wants
to be able to call in a half dozen top flight
commanders and say, I want this, or this is what
we're going to do, and this is your job. And he
doesn't want somebody stubbing their toe because
it reflects on him. He's looking for four stars
instead of three or something like this. And if
they flub their dub down here in this operation,
it's on his 66-1, not mine. You can't offer excuses
on this thing, see. It's just cold turkey. And he's
looking for somebody that he thinks can carry the
ball. And this, after you had this school, then you
were sent as the CO? Is that what happened next in
the progression? You were sent as the CO, 17th
Field Artillery Battalion, Fort Meade,
Maryland? No, no. The next thing that happened,
and I'll tell you this, I'm here today talking to
you
by a good friend of mine trying to, Rook me, you
know. I won't say the word on that. He got out of
Leavenworth. He and I were classmates up there.
Mark Tellerman. And he came back and he didn't do so
hot. So they put him over in personnel.
And he didn't like that worth a damn. Of course,
we're just in a holding station. After you get out
of Leavenworth, they send you out to a senior unit
meaning division or a major unit. Because you've
got to train to do the job, as far as the Army's
concerned, and they send you out there. And
I had a very, well, General Potter, when he saw that
I was 11 in class, he said, damn kid, well that's
great, that's great. He said, I'll have you a job
here some of these days real quick now that you'll
like. Because he's always getting requisitions
from the War Department for an officer of a certain
caliber, of a certain training level.
And I saw him one day at the officer club at lunch. He
said, kiddo, I recommend you for a job today. You
get your bags packed, boy, because you're gone.
Where am I going, gentlemen? Where am I going?
Well, that don't make any difference. You just get
your bags packed. See, I saw him a week later and
said, General, I got my bags packed. I'm still
around. He says, Well, this is a stole. Hold tight.
Just keep your bitches on. I think he told me. And so
I stayed there two, three, four more days. I saw him
again over at the office a couple of nights. He
said, I thought you were gone. I'm waiting on some
orders. He says, well, I saw some orders for you to
go yesterday. I'm by the office when I get back. And
this is all in retrospect now, what happened. And
he told me what, he would never tell me the job
before that, then he told me. What happened was
this friend of mine in personnel The general sent
my name up there to go on this order. It was a top
secret deal. And he could see himself getting out
of this country in a matter of 24 hours. He inserted
his name for my name. Notwithstanding the fact
that he didn't foresee the ultimate
damage that could be done to his army career or his
career. Because if they'd ever caught it, and
they'd have caught it sooner or later, well,
they'd have crucified him. But anyway. Did they
catch him? The answer is no. Why not? How could they
not catch him? OK. The general knew you were
supposed to go. That's right. He went up to Andrews
Air Force Base and got with this group of officers.
They were in a plane going to Portugal to stage on a
top secret mission going in to lay in the man work
for the American Army to go into North Africa. His
plane went down three or four miles off of Portugal
and they were all lost. So you were lucky. So I'm
alive today because that son of a bitch tried to,
well did, rip me. But the job was, General Potter
told me later, that I was going to be the artillery
representative with General Clark, Mark Clark,
went into North Africa in a submarine with a bunch
of gold and all to get with the Free French and set up
the Free French to give us a place to land in North
Africa.
And that whole kit and caboodle was lost because
the airplane
went down. And of course, General Clark was
already there in Portugal, and that's just one of
those things. But I'm here today because he did
that. Well, anyway, that fizzled. That fizzled.
That definitely fizzled. That fizzled as far as I
was concerned. It made a good way for you. Yeah,
that's right, as far as I was concerned. That
fizzled, but then I went up to Fort Meade. Okay, as
the CO of the 17th Field Artillery Division. Yeah.
As a lieutenant colonel. As a lieutenant colonel.
I was promoted lieutenant colonel on April 6,
1943. And
when did you arrive there at Fort Meade? Well, I'll
tell you. Probably about the same time. A little
later.
There's another school I went to. I don't know
whether that's on my mind. But I went to Tanker Star
School.
It was four batteries, typical artillery
battalion. I went up there in July of 43.
Approximately
how many men and how much artillery? Well, a
battalion is four batteries, approximately
100 to 110 or 15 men, about 425 men total. How much
artillery? Well, you've got three gun batteries
and headquarters battery, 12 guns, and
that's standard battery. OK. And what did you do it
for at Meaden? We did training work. Oh, training
work. A big part? More training. More training
work. A similar job to what you had at Fort
Sullivan. That's exactly correct. We were on a
training mission.